ECK 3.5.0 release (#9644)
elastic/cloud-on-k8s: docs/release-notes/index.md

#### Dynamic substitution variables in StackConfigPolicy

The new `variablesFrom` field in `StackConfigPolicy` lets you load key-value pairs from ConfigMaps and Secrets as substitution variables, referenced as `${VAR}` or `${VAR:-default}` expressions in the policy's `elasticsearch` and `kibana` fields, so a single policy definition can be reused across environments with different values. ECK watches all referenced sources and reconciles automatically when they change. For more details, refer to the [StackConfigPolicy documentation](docs-content://deploy-manage/deploy/cloud-on-k8s/elastic-stack-configuration-policies.md#k8s-stack-config-policy-variable-substitution).

#### Reduced operator memory footprint

> ECK 3.5 ships two complementary improvements to reduce the operator's memory usage in large clusters. The controller-runtime cache is now automatically scoped to only watch core workload resources (Pods, StatefulSets, Deployments, DaemonSets, PodDisruptionBudgets) that carry the ECK type label, avoiding the cost of caching unrelated workloads running in the same cluster. An additional opt-in flag, `--label-based-discovery`, further narrows the cache for Secrets, Services, and ConfigMaps to those explicitly labelled with `eck.k8s.elastic.co/watched=true`, which significantly reduces memory and API server load in clusters with large numbers of user-managed resources of those types.

Reviewer: The flag is named `--restrict-watched-resources`, not `--label-based-discovery`. "Label Based Resource Discovery" is the title of PR #9359, but the CLI flag it registers is `restrict-watched-resources` (`cmd/manager/main.go`, `pkg/controller/common/operator/flags.go`). `--label-based-discovery` does not exist in the codebase, so users copying it would hit an unknown-flag error. Please use `--restrict-watched-resources`.

Author: Nice catch, we renamed the cli (its correct in the docs repo). Fixed in https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9644/commits/9b2f4f80ccbbf7acdccc48cd55d1ac6c325e219e

- Version-gate Fleet Server mTLS support [#9486](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9486)
- Add `pause-orchestration` annotation support for {{es}} [#9330](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9330)
- Update `annotator.sh` script for the `eck.k8s.elastic.co/pause-orchestration` annotation [#9354](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9354)
- Add `pause-orchestration` annotation support for Elastic Agent, and Beats (boilerplate) [#9417](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9417)
- Add `pause-orchestration` annotation support for Elastic Agent, and Beats [#9398](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9398)
- Add webhook validation for the `pause-orchestration` annotation [#9474](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9474)
- Add `pause-orchestration` annotation support for Logstash [#9484](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9484)
- Add `pause-orchestration` annotation support for AutoOps [#9477](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9477)
- Reduce operator memory footprint by configuring cache to only watch ECK-labelled resources [#9339](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9339)

> - Introduce `--label-based-discovery` flag to narrow cache for Secrets, Services, and ConfigMaps [#9359](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9359)

Reviewer: Same flag-name issue as in the highlight: the flag introduced by #9359 is `--restrict-watched-resources`, not `--label-based-discovery`.

Author: Fixed https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9644/commits/9b2f4f80ccbbf7acdccc48cd55d1ac6c325e219e

- Fix unexpected pod restarts by scoping template hash computation to Spec [#9437](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9437)
- AutoOps: prefer `ca.crt` over `tls.crt` for {{es}} TLS verification [#9463](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9463)
- Fix Logstash ignoring `set-default-security-context` operator flag [#9551](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9551)
- Clean up service-account-token secrets on association Unbind [#9562](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9562)
- Verify owner references when building client cert trust bundle [#9561](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9561)
- Add missing RBAC for Kubernetes metricsets in agent ClusterRoles [#9612](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9612)
- Store `FLEET_SERVER_SERVICE_TOKEN` in Secret instead of plaintext pod env var [#9626](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9626)
- Gate Fleet Server minimum version to 8.13.0 for {{es}} mTLS support [#9598](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9598)

### Documentation improvements [elastic-cloud-kubernetes-350-documentation-improvements]

> - Add auto section contents to reference sections, add redirect from old API page [#9426](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9426)

Reviewer: #9426 carries the `exclude-from-release-notes` label, yet it is the sole "Documentation improvements" entry. I don't tracking documentation improvements here makes a lot of sense anymore with the new docs-content repo.

Author: Removed the documentation improvements section entierly here https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9644/commits/9b2f4f80ccbbf7acdccc48cd55d1ac6c325e219e

- Implement Elastic Maps Server support for presenting client certificates to {{es}} [#9331](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9331)
- Implement ECK monitoring support for presenting client certificates to {{es}} [#9334](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9334)
- Implement Fleet Server and Elastic Agent support for presenting client certificates to {{es}} [#9234](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9234)
- Implement AutoOps agent support for presenting client certificates to {{es}} [#9333](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9333)
- Implement mTLS support for Fleet Server and Elastic Agent connections [#9399](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9399)
- Version-gate Fleet Server mTLS support [#9486](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9486)
- Add `pause-orchestration` annotation support for {{es}} [#9330](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9330)
- Update `annotator.sh` script for the `eck.k8s.elastic.co/pause-orchestration` annotation [#9354](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9354)

> - Add `pause-orchestration` annotation support for Elastic Agent, and Beats (boilerplate) [#9417](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9417)

Reviewer 2: do we really want the boilerplate PR to be user-facing?

Author: No harm in having it. (We provide the full implementation to any interested party)

- Add webhook validation for the `pause-orchestration` annotation [#9474](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9474)
- Add `pause-orchestration` annotation support for Logstash [#9484](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9484)
- Add `pause-orchestration` annotation support for AutoOps [#9477](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9477)
- Reduce operator memory footprint by configuring cache to only watch ECK-labelled resources [#9339](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9339)
- Introduce `--label-based-discovery` flag to narrow cache for Secrets, Services, and ConfigMaps [#9359](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9359)
- Simplified container resources spec for all ECK CRDs [#9346](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9346)
- Allow overriding AutoOps agent collector configuration via `spec.config`/`spec.configRef` [#9507](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9507)
- Add support for {{product.kibana}} Spaces in Fleet integration policies [#9410](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9410)

> - Publish `olm.skipRange` to support sparse and air-gapped OLM catalogs [#9451](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9451)

Reviewer 2: part already of 3.4.1 release?

Author: I guess you mean the last of the 4 selected lines, cleaned up here https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9644/commits/3da28ad8d924dd548eb943956447be6831969087

#### Mutual TLS expansion across all Stack components

ECK 3.4 introduced {{es}} client certificate authentication with support for {{product.kibana}} only, and promised that support for the remaining components would follow. ECK 3.5 delivers on that: all remaining Stack components that connect to {{es}} — APM Server, Beats, Enterprise Search, Elastic Maps Server, Logstash, Elastic Agent (standalone), and Fleet Server — now automatically receive ECK-managed client certificates and present them when connecting to {{es}}. For fleet-managed agents, Fleet Server propagates the client certificate information to all connected agents automatically, with no additional configuration required.

ECK 3.5 also introduces a second, independent mTLS capability: Fleet Server can now be configured to require client certificates from connecting Elastic Agents, enforcing mutual TLS on the Fleet Server to Elastic Agent connection. This is an Enterprise feature and requires Fleet Server version 8.19.19+, 9.3.8+, 9.4.4+, or 9.5.0+.

> For more details, refer to the [{{es}} client certificate authentication documentation](docs-content://deploy-manage/security/k8s-es-client-certificate-auth.md) and the [Fleet Server client certificate authentication documentation](docs-content://deploy-manage/security/k8s-fleet-server-client-certificate-auth.md).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Mutual TLS expansion across all Stack components

All Stack components that connect to {{es}} — APM Server, Beats, Enterprise Search, Elastic Maps Server, Logstash, Elastic Agent (standalone), and Fleet Server — now automatically receive ECK-managed client certificates and present them when connecting to {{es}}. For fleet-managed agents, Fleet Server propagates the client certificate information to all connected agents automatically, with no additional configuration required. For more details, refer to the [{{es}} client certificate authentication documentation](docs-content://deploy-manage/security/k8s-es-client-certificate-auth.md).

Beyond securing connections to {{es}}, Fleet Server can also be configured to require client certificates from the Elastic Agents connecting to it. This is an Enterprise feature. For more details, refer to the [Fleet Server client certificate authentication documentation](docs-content://deploy-manage/security/k8s-fleet-server-client-certificate-auth.md).
```

#### AutoOps agent collector configuration

The `AutoOpsAgentPolicy` resource now exposes `spec.config` and `spec.configRef` fields for tuning the AutoOps agent's collector configuration directly from the CRD, without manually editing configuration files. This gives you control over which metricsets are collected and at what interval. For more details, refer to the [AutoOps data collection documentation](docs-content://deploy-manage/monitor/autoops/autoops-disable-metrics-collection.md).

#### Hot-reload of secure settings without pod restarts

For {{es}} 9.5 and later, ECK now supports an opt-in file-based delivery mechanism for `spec.secureSettings` that eliminates the rolling restart previously required on every secret update. Enable it by adding the `eck.k8s.elastic.co/file-based-secure-settings: "true"` annotation to your {{es}} resource; ECK then writes secrets directly into the {{es}} file-based settings path and {{es}} reloads them in place. For more details, refer to the [secure settings documentation](docs-content://deploy-manage/security/k8s-secure-settings.md#k8s-es-secure-settings-hot-reload).

#### StackConfigPolicy enhancements

> ECK 3.5 adds two new capabilities to `StackConfigPolicy`. The new `securityRoles` field lets you define custom {{es}} roles declaratively within a policy and apply them consistently across all targeted clusters; ECK merges the definitions into the `roles.yml` file mounted on each {{es}} pod and {{es}} hot-reloads them without a pod restart. The new `variablesFrom` field lets you load key-value pairs from ConfigMaps and Secrets as substitution variables, referenced as `${VAR}` or `${VAR:-default}` expressions in the policy's `elasticsearch` and `kibana` fields, so a single policy definition can be reused across environments with different values. ECK watches all referenced sources and reconciles automatically when they change. For more details, refer to the [StackConfigPolicy documentation](docs-content://deploy-manage/deploy/cloud-on-k8s/elastic-stack-configuration-policies.md).

Reviewer 2: I would separate this into two

```suggestion
#### {{es}} role definitions in StackConfigPolicy

The new `securityRoles` field in `StackConfigPolicy` lets you define custom {{es}} roles declaratively within a policy and apply them consistently across all targeted clusters. ECK merges the definitions into the `roles.yml` file mounted on each {{es}} pod and {{es}} hot-reloads them without a pod restart. For more details, refer to the [StackConfigPolicy documentation](docs-content://deploy-manage/deploy/cloud-on-k8s/elastic-stack-configuration-policies.md#k8s-stack-config-policy-specifics-security-roles).

#### Dynamic substitution variables in StackConfigPolicy

The new `variablesFrom` field in `StackConfigPolicy` lets you load key-value pairs from ConfigMaps and Secrets as substitution variables, referenced as `${VAR}` or `${VAR:-default}` expressions in the policy's `elasticsearch` and `kibana` fields, so a single policy definition can be reused across environments with different values. ECK watches all referenced sources and reconciles automatically when they change. For more details, refer to the [StackConfigPolicy documentation](docs-content://deploy-manage/deploy/cloud-on-k8s/elastic-stack-configuration-policies.md#k8s-stack-config-policy-variable-substitution).
```

- Implement Logstash support for presenting client certificates to {{es}} [#9308](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9308)
- Implement Beats support for presenting client certificates to {{es}} [#9306](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9306)
- Implement Enterprise Search support for presenting client certificates to {{es}} [#9332](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9332)
- Implement APM Server support for presenting client certificates to {{es}} [#9307](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9307)
- Implement Elastic Maps Server support for presenting client certificates to {{es}} [#9331](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9331)
- Implement ECK monitoring support for presenting client certificates to {{es}} [#9334](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9334)
- Implement Fleet Server and Elastic Agent support for presenting client certificates to {{es}} [#9234](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9234)
- Implement AutoOps agent support for presenting client certificates to {{es}} [#9333](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9333)

> - Present client certificate in legacy {{es}} readiness probe when client authentication is enabled [#9375](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9375)

Reviewer 2: does this belong here?

Author: cleaned up here https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/commit/e62a15aeb7b359e63b107b22d471562053c34456

- Implement mTLS support for Fleet Server and Elastic Agent connections [#9399](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9399)
- Version-gate Fleet Server mTLS support [#9486](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9486)
- Add `pause-orchestration` annotation support for {{es}} [#9330](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9330)
- Update `annotator.sh` script for the `eck.k8s.elastic.co/pause-orchestration` annotation [#9354](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9354)

> - Add `pause-orchestration` annotation support for stateless resources, Elastic Agent, and Beats [#9417](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9417)

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't this be #9398?

Author: Added both in https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9644/commits/5d9eeaea6e98abc80a03b948b8ba9e119d121293

- Add webhook validation for the `pause-orchestration` annotation [#9474](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9474)
- Add `pause-orchestration` annotation support for Logstash [#9484](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9484)
- Add `pause-orchestration` annotation support for AutoOps [#9477](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9477)
- Reduce operator memory footprint by configuring cache to only watch ECK-labelled resources [#9339](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9339)
- Introduce `--label-based-discovery` flag to narrow cache for Secrets, Services, and ConfigMaps [#9359](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9359)

> - Add secure file settings support for stateless {{es}} [#9309](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9309)

Reviewer 2: This had `exclude-from-release-notes`; Also stateless ES was removed (#9555)

Author: cleaned up here https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/commit/e62a15aeb7b359e63b107b22d471562053c34456

- Simplified container resources spec for all ECK CRDs [#9346](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9346)

> - Add logs-elastic* index privileges to stack monitoring role [#9353](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9353)

Reviewer 2: already part of 3.4 release?

> - [AutoOps] Add `sending_queue` configuration to configmap [#9391](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9391)

Reviewer 2: already part of 3.4 release?

Author: cleaned up here https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9644/commits/5e951b485d2cbb410120dedcba84d928a4ec8e69

- Validate secure settings sources against active StackConfigPolicies [#9593](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9593)
- {{product.kibana}} readiness probes use status API [#9468](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9468)
- Add map support for `extraObjects` in Helm charts [#9478](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9478)
- Opt-in support for file-based cluster settings enabling hot-reload of secure settings without pod restarts [#9458](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9458)
- Switch to Go native FIPS with a static binary [#9538](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9538)
- Dynamic namespaces: label-selector-based namespace scoping (Enterprise feature) [#9569](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9569)
- Relax custom CA secret parsing to support cert-manager secrets [#9574](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9574)
- Batch {{es}} keystore add-file invocations [#9440](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9440)
- Move Condition types from `common/v1alpha1` to `common/v1` [#9408](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9408)

> - Bump minimum supported OpenShift version to v4.14 [#9423](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9423)

Reviewer 2: already part of 3.4 release?

### Fixes [elastic-cloud-kubernetes-350-fixes]

> - Fix `expectDesiredNodesAPI` to also check `nodeSet.Resources` shorthand [#9402](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9402)

Reviewer 2: this CI/test fix and it has `exclude-from-release-notes`

Author: cleaned up here https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/commit/e62a15aeb7b359e63b107b22d471562053c34456

> - Fix secure settings annotation lost on file-settings Secret re-save [#9422](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9422)

Reviewer 2: this has `exclude-from-release-notes`

Author: cleaned up here https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9644/commits/e62a15aeb7b359e63b107b22d471562053c34456

- AutoOps: prefer `ca.crt` over `tls.crt` for {{es}} TLS verification [#9463](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9463)
- Fix Logstash ignoring `set-default-security-context` operator flag [#9551](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9551)
- Clean up service-account-token secrets on association Unbind [#9562](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9562)
- Verify owner references when building client cert trust bundle [#9561](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9561)
- Add missing RBAC for Kubernetes metricsets in agent ClusterRoles [#9612](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9612)
- Store `FLEET_SERVER_SERVICE_TOKEN` in Secret instead of plaintext pod env var [#9626](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9626)
- Gate Fleet Server minimum version to 8.13.0 for {{es}} mTLS support [#9598](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9598)

### Documentation improvements [elastic-cloud-kubernetes-350-documentation-improvements]

- Add auto section contents to reference sections, add redirect from old API page [#9426](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9426)

> - Fix the documentation link on OperatorHub [#9420](https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9420)

Reviewer 2: Part of 3.4.1 already?

Author: cleaned up here https://github.com/elastic/cloud-on-k8s/pull/9644/commits/5e951b485d2cbb410120dedcba84d928a4ec8e69
